We are talking to Elizabeth Berg and Nadick.
This won't be very—we'll just cover a lot of things, okay?
Some of it, as you saw from that list, is very—well, let's just talk—can you just give me a little biographical background?
Let's start very innocently.
You can tell me a little bit about—
Wow!
You mentioned the fact that you're an army brat, so you've had a peripatetic life, which I'm sure reflects itself on what you've written so far to some degree.
Yeah, particularly in Endurable Goods, which is about an army brat.
That's fine.
I'm just going to put this closer to you, like right there.
Okay?
The closer it is, the better it is for a transcript.
Sure.
So, yeah, that's the deal.
My father was, in fact...
out of the service at the time I was born, which is why I got to be born in Minnesota.
My brother was born in Germany and my sister was born in California.
And then he rejoined, I think I was two or three, and we started moving around like crazy from that time on.
And there were two or three years in which I went to three different schools in that one year.
It was not great.
My father has a whole different perspective on it because he sees it as an opportunity to travel.
And it's true that, you know, I saw Spain and Italy and all that stuff.
But I wanted to be here so that I would know what was on the top ten.
You know, I could care less about going into the catacombs.
I wanted to see the commercials.
I wanted to see what they were wearing and all that stuff.
And so it was sort of lost on me.
And it was very hard to be.
the new girl all the time and not be studying, not having, you know, I was studying something in one school and then I'd come here and they'd be doing Texas history and, you know.
And also knowing that it is impermanent.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
With the almost certain knowledge that you're going to be going someplace else.
Yeah, there's something that interests me a lot about
about that kind of growing up in Army Breath, and that is something that I seem to see in all of them, which is that you seem to be gregarious, very friendly, chatty, you can get along with anybody, you can make a conversation with anyone, but you only let people get so far, and then you stop, because it's too painful to open yourself up to people and then leave, and constantly leave, and all those promises about, I'm going to write you early days,
I remember pulling my eyelash out in one new school and writing my best friend and saying, here's my eyelash, I'm going to write you every day for the rest of my life, and you know, last about three weeks.
Just for biographical purposes, can you tell me your father's name, your mother's name?
My father's name is Arthur Peter Hoff, and my mother's name is H-O-S-S.
And my mother's name is...
Yeah, I call him AP.
Okay.
And my mother's name is Marion Jean, she goes by Jean.
J-E-A-M-N-E.
Okay.
And you were born in St.
Claude, you said?
Yeah.
Was this while your dad was still in the service?
No, he was in, he came out for a while, and then he decided to re-enlist.
So this would be, you said, 46?
48.
I mean, you're 46 years old, so it was about 1948.
Right.
I was born in 48, yeah.
Okay.
Baby boomer.
Yeah.
So to speak.
And your father was in the Army.
I mean, Army Brad is almost an officer, or was it?
Yeah.
Don't you forget.
Yes.
He was a major when he retired.
Uh-huh.
And the truth is, I never...
knew very much about what he did.
It was not a talkative sharing kind of family environment, for one thing.
And he's not much of a talker anyway, but he had different jobs in artillery and intelligence.
His last job was in recruiting.
And he would wear those play army clothes, you know, he'd come home sometimes in critiques and combat boots and all that.
I used to like to unlace the combat, which is very exciting.
He was out of the service when you were born, but then he went back in again?
Yeah.
Was this around Korea or something like that, or why he was growing up?
Well, let's see, he would have re-enlisted around 50 or 51.
I don't know exactly why he did that, except
My sense is that, yes, exactly.
He loved travel.
I think that it offered him a lot of security, particularly since he knew he could be in 20 years and then retire and have pay or whatever it is that happens.
But he liked that life.
And that married folks that still live?
Mm-hmm.
And they obviously are fans of yours.
I'm sure they read your books.
Uh, yeah, yeah, durable books was a hard one for my father because, um, it was, it was loosely autobiographical.
My father was a pretty scary guy, yeah.
You were anticipating a question here, okay.
Yeah, but, so, um, the truth is that when I wrote that manuscript, um, uh,
I had the first, let's see, the first book I ever wrote came about because I've been writing for magazines a lot, including Terrence Magazine.
And this is all stuff that we want, by the way.
Okay, okay, okay, so I won't feel guilty.
No, no, I mean, if you look at your little list, your little... Okay, well, I didn't see the whole thing.
But anyway... I'll show you when we can.
All right.
We'll make sure we do that.
No, because I don't want you thinking about it.
I just, you know, I mean, it's very... No, no, I... You know what I'm saying?
Yeah.
I hate doing interviews.
The truth is that I will try to weasel out of almost any interview that comes up, except this one, because when Sally told me that PW wanted to do an interview, I said, really?
And I was thinking, hmm, PW or PW?
So I wanted to do this one because it's a big deal.
There's a real bonus getting me, by the way, too, I have to say.
I heard good things about you.
But beyond that, I mean, the payoff is that I write for 23 other newspapers in college towns.
Oh, right, yeah, yeah.
But I just heard that you were really, you know, that I wouldn't, they said, oh, you're really going to like him.
And look what a good start we're off to.
We're going to have vodka in a little while.
I've got brownies coming out of the aisle.
I really do.
I got nervous, so I made brownies.
But I hate doing the news because I feel like everything that I want to say publicly is in my books, which is, you know, the old cliche.
moreover, and more importantly, and biggest, I feel when I'm talking about myself that someone behind me is saying, wow, aren't we fascinated with ourselves?
My, my.
And, you know, don't you think you've said, I'm trapped now?
Isn't it the other person's surgery?
You know, all that stuff.
And then, you know, you're going to say something so completely manane that we'll
Let's go back to the first book.
You had done a lot of magazines.
Let's start at the beginning.
So I was a nurse.
And I loved nursing.
But my children were young.
They were about four and nine when I stopped nursing.
And sometimes they would be just a little bit sick.
They weren't sick enough that I would
feel like I had to call in and say I can't come to work, but I would feel terrible leaving them because they would have a little cold and I wanted to be with them.
Where was this, by the way?
That I was a nurse?
Yeah.
Lots of places, including Leonard Morse, well it was Leonard Morse Hospital, which is right at the end of this block.
It's now Metro West.
I worked at Newton Wellesley Hospital.
I did visiting nursing.
I did, at one point I was working in intensive care.
Oh, they're the best people.
They are the best.
If you ever go to the hospital, get in with the nurses.
Forget about the doctors.
Get in with the nurses.
But anyway, so I was doing intensive care and home nursing, and it was a really wonderful contrast to be in the really high-tech area and then see them at home in their own little jammies and with their phones beside them and their children and all their own things, and it was a kind of access that you're not allowed when you're
in the hospital so I loved doing it but I felt badly about leaving my kids oftentimes and then you know you had to work on your birthday you have to work on Christmas you have to work nights you have to work double shifts all that stuff so I had I thought um I thought because um people had always told me from forever you know you're such a good writer you ought to be a writer
And I wrote, you know, letters and I wrote in journals.
Hi, here's Lisa.
I just wanted to get back to you on... I'll call you back.
Anyway, so... Is that a little red light when I write this going?
Yes.
Okay, great.
Yes, it is.
Okay, so... Okay, don't let me forget what I'm... Okay, so...
I said, okay, I know what I'm going to do.
I'm going to be your writer.
So I sent off, I went and got some magazines that I thought I could perhaps write for, including Parents Magazine.
And I sent off some queries, and Parents Magazine was having, in the issue I bought, there was an essay contest, and you were supposed to write about how you solve some aspects of parenting.
So I wrote a little essay for Parents Magazine, and I sent off queries.
waited for them to, you know, call me and say, oh, you're so wonderful, what have you been?
And so the letters came back to the queries that said, don't be ridiculous, don't ever call us again, you know, more or less.
And I said, well, fine.
So, and they were, I mean, I did everything wrong.
It was brown ink and everything, you know, because I thought it would be pretty to have brown scripts on my... How old were you about this time?
35.
Really?
And let me just interject, you said people thought you wrote well, I mean did you write for publication?
No, no, this was just friends, you know, and in school, and in school, because I wrote letters, I mean I always wrote, from the time I was a little girl I wrote, I used to try to write poetry when I was a little girl, and I sent a poem off, I sent my first poem off at nine years old
and it was rejected by American Girl magazine, American Girl magazine.
And I got the rejection letter and I was devastated.
For one thing, my poem rhymed, and I couldn't imagine why they would have all this free verse and not take my rhyming poem.
Was it a form letter?
Yes.
The last line of my poem was, the beauty enchantment now was broken.
And she remembers it after a week.
I remember the whole thing.
But anyway, I really felt terrible.
I was so embarrassed, and I went in my room and I cried, and I didn't submit anything for 25 years.
But anyway, so I... It's a great life.
You're doing very well.
You're making my job very easy here.
Anyway, so I got the re-diff for the queries, and said, fine.
I keep thinking you're going to say somebody else or something else when you start with that.
Yeah, yeah.
Not me.
So then we moved.
We were living in South Bend.
We moved to Newton, and I got a letter one day, and shortly after we'd moved, it was from Parents' Agency.
I thought actually it was a solicitation for a subscription, which I did not want.
So I threw it away, and I thought, well, but it's not, yeah.
So I opened it because it was a different kind of envelope.
I threw out checks like this.
Where do you live?
Where do you keep your garbage?
I can check from 30 different newspapers and you never know.
It looks like a stupid computer.
You have to open all your mail.
My wife says, you don't touch the mail anymore.
I open all the mail.
I'll take care of this.
I have tons of junk and I routinely throw stuff away without opening it.
I do too.
But anyway, when I opened it, what it was, was a letter from Parents 19 saying, which I still have, is that?
Saying, congratulations, it took us many months to call through the thousands of entries we received, but you are a winner, you know, the ParentWise contest.
And the ParentWise?
It was called the ParentWise contest.
One word?
Like wise, parent, you know, parent-wise.
One word or two words.
One.
Okay.
ParentWise is one word.
Right.
So, um...
They had chosen three people to win a prize of $500.
What happened, actually, is that they ran the other things, like the prize winners of, you know, here are our efforts, but they held mine, and then they just ran mine as an article.
It was in 1985, I think, and so I couldn't believe it.
I couldn't
And so I looked at the check for about a year, you know, I just kept looking at it and looking at it.
And then I said, okay, I'm going to go spend it.
So I went to my favorite store, which was called Limited Edition, and I bought stupid stuff.
I bought a purse and jewelry and a scarf.
I mean, nothing that I needed.
And not even things that I was particularly crazy about.
It's just that I had this money that I was going to go wildly spend.
And then when I came home, I put all my stuff on the dining room table, and then I started crying.
And I said, look what I bought.
I could have bought a Mix Master if I'd thought about this.
I could have bought a Mix Master.
So I said, if I ever sell another article, I'm getting that Mix Master.
So I started selling articles, in fact, regularly to Parents Magazine.
Parents Magazine bought, I think, almost everything.
I sensed it real well.
It was a very happy combination because... Starting in 86.
Yeah, because the editor at the time had children, my children's age.
She is so fabulous.
Elizabeth Crow is her name, and she's now the editor-in-chief at Manusel.
She's a very wonderful, bright, generous, open woman who's not afraid
to say to someone who's brand new, you've got a lot of talent and I'm going to, you know, and I'm going to use you.
I mean, she didn't, she didn't make me feel, she just made me feel like I was a professional or something.
So then I started writing for a lot of other magazines, and then I, well, I also was diagnosed with cancer in 85, and I, and I was.
Is it above the same time you sent in that?
It is.
I had just, I had just,
sold um you know that essay thing and i just started and and she had and she had uh i had told her i had another one that i wanted to send her and and she said fine did you tell me the title of the first piece that you sent in that one that you remember it but it's always involved
It was about, ironically enough, it was about leaving work to stay home with your children, how that was a fine thing to do.
And of course, then I immediately went back to work, because it didn't, but anyway.
But let me ask, did you write this prior to your diagnosis or after your diagnosis?
No, I had not been diagnosed.
I was working part-time as a nurse.
I was beginning to sell articles to Parents Magazine, and then I was diagnosed.
I remember calling... No, no.
Tell me when I'm... You brought up diagnosis, and I see it in here.
Can you tell me what it was, or do you prefer not telling me what the diagnosis is?
No, I'll tell you what it is.
I had had a rash right here on my stomach for a number of years.
Okay.
But just tell me basically, was it skin cancer?
No, this is why I have to tell you what it was.
I had a rash.
I thought it was nothing.
It was treated with steroids and so on.
It was finally biopsy.
And I said, why are you biopsying it?
Are you looking for basal cell carcinoma, which of course is skin cancer?
And they said, no, we're looking for mycosis fungoides, which is a lymphoma and is incurable.
And that's not the way that I was told, by the way.
I'm shortening it.
But you're a health professional.
You know what's going on.
What happened was I went to one doctor who said, I want to biopsy this.
And I said, what for?
And she said, this was here in Framingham.
She said, I'm not going to tell you what for because if I tell you what for, you're going to go home and look it up and you're going to freak out.
And we don't know what it is.
So I said, well, now you have to tell me what you're looking for.
So she told me mycosis fungoides.
I went home and looked it up and freaked out.
So that biopsy came back negative.
What happens with MS is it's very hard to diagnose.
You can get a lot of negative biopsies before you get a pocket.
The rash persisted and spread.
I had it biopsied yet again.
I was at home.
My kids were four and nine.
They each had a friend over.
Howard was at work.
This doctor called me and said,
We got your biopsy back.
And I said yes.
And I was wishing you'd hurry up and say it's fine.
Just use steroids.
And he said, it looks like something's going on in your skin.
And I said, uh-oh.
And I sat down on the bed.
I remember I had my little apron on.
And I said, is it MF?
And he said, yes.
And I said, my co-system.
Isn't that the ugliest thing?
Is it in here?
Will I be able to spell this?
M-Y-C-O-S-I-S, F-U-N-G-O-I-D-E-S.
It means looks like fungus, which it does.
It looks like a fungal kind of graphic.
So… I won't make a big deal out of this, but… Yeah, don't make a big deal of it.
It'll maybe be one paragraph.
Well, the thing that it did… But it is pertinent to the writing that… It certainly is, yeah.
And I… And so I… Which is what I'm fundamentally interested in.
I talked to him for a little bit.
I called Howard who came home immediately.
He took a few days off from work.
I took off from work.
I went to the hospital library and I researched this disease and I saw and I got a million zeroes.
Are we in 86 though?
And this is after the Parents Magazine?
Yeah, I had just begun.
I called Elizabeth Crown and said, I'm going to be a little late sending this article.
I just got diagnosed with a curable cancer.
C-R-O-W.
She's wonderful.
So I was taking my kids to the beach.
It was almost Jenny's birthday.
In fact, it was 10 years ago on the 8th.
So I was taking my kids to the beach and when they were playing in the water, I was reading these horrible articles about statistics about when people died and looking at these graphic photos of people in fourth stage disease.
It was the worst time in my life ever.
But the day I found...
You're about the age of Lainey in the book.
Of course, it's her husband.
Yeah, yeah.
But the day that it happened, this just will, I think, let you know briefly what my attitude about this is the evening of the day that I was diagnosed.
I told the kids that I was going to take them berry picking over to a friend's house.
And we went berry picking over to that friend's house.
And I came back and I made pies.
And they were the best pies I ever made.
And my husband said, which was the most wonderful thing, he said, do you want to do the I Ching?
And I said, yes, I want to do the I Ching.
And I didn't know how to do it, but he knows how to do it.
I know how to do it now, though.
And the thing that I got back was molting of the skin.
What's the I Ching on it?
The I Ching is the Chinese Book of Changes.
Oh, okay, so he asked you to... You get these, you toss coins six times and you get these little hexagrams, scissors back, and then you look it up and here's what you've got.
I've always had incredible respect, you know, woo-woo mysticism around this kind of thing.
But I got molting of the skin, okay?
And I said, okay, well, that's a good sign.
And I felt better.
And nothing else made me feel better, because I don't have any traditional religion.
And I didn't really trust anything that I read in articles, and I didn't trust my doctor.
I just feel like we know so little, really.
So that made me feel terrific.
And what happened in the weeks subsequent to that diagnosis was I found out that the
mean time of survival for a patient's diagnosis is 10 years.
That's the mean time of survival.
And I had very early stage disease.
And he was telling me, it runs again.
You can get radiation therapy, you can do chemo therapy, you can do local applications of steroids, you can use light therapy, electron beam therapy.
It's so confusing, and I ended up, I went to Stanford University, I went to Temple University, I consulted everybody I could consult with.
I ended up, and I quit nursing because I thought I was going to do electron beam therapy and aggressive chemotherapy, and I did not, but I thought I was going to do that.
But that's why you kept, so you quit nursing about?
I quit nursing because I didn't know what I was going to be doing.
But three things are happening at the same time here.
It started to write, yeah.
It started to write, you've been diagnosed with cancer and you quit nursing.
This was all happening about 1986 or so.
Right, right.
So I… This will show up as one sentence in two, by the way.
That's fine.
It just, it was a real wake-up call, as you might expect, because what I was told by a badly misinformed doctor was I had about five years.
And then when I found out that the mean time of survival was ten years according to NCI statistics, I went back to him with that information and you know what he said?
He said, well, you have your statistics and I have mine.
So I promptly found another doctor who shared M&Ms with me and who saw life a little bit more like I do.
Did he say it smugly?
Yeah, because he had been called on something.
The fact was he was ill-prepared and he
So at that point, they're dismissive, aren't they?
Yeah.
Sound familiar?
I mean, you know a little bit about the business.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, he was embarrassed because he hadn't done his homework.
Anyway, I never went back to nursing because I started selling articles like crazy for magazines, and I got to stay home with my kids, I got to write
for a living, which I love doing.
Was there a theme to what you were writing?
Oh no, I wrote about my kids.
Their first person, personal experience pieces.
And then I began selling to other magazines as well.
Can you name some of them?
Name some of the magazines.
Oh, Parents Magazine, I wrote for Woman's Day, I wrote for Family Circle, I wrote for Red Book, Ladies Home Journal,
So there's a specific readership?
Women's magazines, yeah.
Okay.
And there were personal experience pieces.
And then I began writing fiction.
And at about what point?
When?
I guess about, I guess just two or maybe three years into it.
About 1990 or so?
I mean, I can tell you exactly, but it would take some time.
Somewhere around there, yeah.
We were going to say about.
About is a wonderful word.
Yeah, about.
About.
I can look it up later tonight.
But I didn't feel that I could ever write a book, because it seemed to me that it would be trying to keep track of little puppy dog's tales, you know, that you just do... How could you ever... A book meaning a novel.
A novel.
I mean, how could you ever, you know, you start it and then you write so many pages, how could you ever remember what was at the beginning?
I mean, it's really impossible.
I couldn't do it.
I didn't want to do it.
I would never, ever do it.
So...
Somebody called Parents Magazine in, let's see now, 91, looking, they said, who's a really good writer?
Because I want to do a book on family traditions, and I want a really good writer to, you know, I have readers that I just want to do, and I've got the whole, you know, it's all set, I just need to write.
So they said, oh, this is her.
She's so very popular.
So she called me and said, want to do this book, and I said.
Was it an agent or a publisher?
No, a book developer.
A book developer.
Yeah.
Do you know about book developers?
No.
They're sort of like middle people.
They're like hit hunters, so to speak, right?
Well, they arrange for the art and some of the mechanics, which I don't really know about, and so they save the publisher money because they arrange for all this other stuff, and then they find a writer and they put together a package.
Exactly.
And they get half.
It happens a lot.
Yes, it is.
And of course, now when I think about it, I think, particularly since in this case, Rudolf Digest ended up paying for all the other stuff.
So the book developer, please keep this off
the record, but the developer did very well on that deal.
She really cleaned up.
Because I changed it.
I made a new table of contents.
It was really much more my book.
But with all due respect, it was the book developer's idea.
Exactly, exactly.
And it did give you the exact amount of publishing.
Not really, as it turns out.
I'll tell you why not.
So this book was titled, and I did see it.
Family traditions.
And when we're talking family traditions, we're talking about what, like Hanukkah, stuff like that?
Yes, those traditions, but also...
honoring things in ordinary days.
You see a theme beginning to emerge here.
Oh, God, I don't know.
You can look at the table of contents.
Well, we'll show it to me before I go, so I guess it's still in print.
Yeah, still in print.
It just came out of the paperback.
Well, that's important that P.W.
wants to know that letter.
So why don't you just leave it here and I'll take a look at it.
So anyway, I told her, no, I did not want to write that book because, first of all, I
I didn't think I was a book writer, and secondly, although I would love to be, but secondly, I didn't have any traditions, and my family was not a great, you know, not rich in tradition, let me say simply.
So she said, well, let me send you a proposal, and just take a look at it and see what you think.
She sent me the proposal, and she had that most seductive of things on there, Family Traditions by Elizabeth Berg.
And I thought, well, you know, maybe I could do it.
And then I'd at least have a book.
It would be a thing that people could hold in their hands and bring in the bathtub.
And, you know, it would be really wonderful to have a book.
So I said I would do it.
It was an enormous amount of research, not like yours, I'm sure, but a lot of research for me.
Can I borrow this, by the way, and I'll send it back to you?
Sure.
And I think it's a worthwhile book.
I think it turned out pretty nicely.
It was a pain in the butt to write.
It just made me crazy because I like, no matter what I'm doing, whether I'm in the intensive care unit or making dinner, I like to have fun.
So I wasn't having fun.
It wasn't enough fun.
How about the book did well, though?
It did very well, yeah.
It wasn't freeing enough, and I wanted to pull at that most creative part of myself, and this was, in fact, restricting me.
So what I did was I said, all right, look, you have to write this book because you said you'd do it.
So you write this book, but every day on Tuesday you can write whatever you want.
because I had my writer's group on Wednesday.
So what I would bring to my writer's group was fiction, which I allowed myself to write on Tuesday, which became Durable Goods.
So I sent my agent— This was 1992 when it was published.
Right.
That was published in 1992, and I began writing Durable Goods.
Did it appear as a hardcover first?
Yeah.
Want to see the hardcover?
It looked just like that.
How long did it take you to write it?
I don't know, six months or so.
Every Tuesday I would just write durable goods.
And durable goods came out like pouring water out of the pitcher.
Like throwing up.
I would sit down with the typewriter and type continuously.
Now, that was kind of a departure, wasn't it, from the essays that you've been writing, the pieces, the durable goods?
Do you think of it?
I always write really fast.
I don't mean in terms of the production, I mean in terms of the writing, the story, the thematic stuff.
It was, yes, it was, yes, because it was a novel, for one thing, and it took its own… But I mean thematically and…
the kind of stories that you've been writing for the magazines.
Yes, yes.
It's your company voice that you use writing for women's magazines.
I absolutely had my heart in what I was doing, but it's a different kind of writing.
You can't be as loose as you are in a novel.
And in durable goods, I just let myself go.
And I didn't know that
It was really going to be a novel.
I just had this thing inside.
It's like an irritation.
It's like you feel something under your skin and you pick away at it.
You need to get that thing out, you know.
And I never know with any of my books, in fact, what it is exactly that I'm going to need to say.
I start with a feeling and then whatever happens, happens.
A couple of things.
Did you have an agent or were you strictly with the book development?
I did have an agent because I had… You did or you did not?
I did have an agent because what happened was I had sold these fiction stories and I had started a novel.
It was not Durable Goods.
I had started another novel.
That novel was… Which I showed… I was also doing television at that time because I was doing…
video essays for special report television.
And so my little career was beginning to grow, and I was getting these contracts, and I sort of didn't know.
It felt like things were going to start happening more, and I knew that I was not able to handle that myself.
So I asked Elizabeth Crow for the names of agents, and she gave me the names of agents.
I made appointments with two of them, and I liked them both, but I chose Lisa Bancoff at ICM.
And that's who you're still with.
And that's who I'm still with.
And I gave Lisa, you know, she had seen the beginning of this other novel I was writing, but Durable Goods said, excuse me.
So I showed Lisa 90, 120, I guess, 120 pages of it.
I hadn't finished it.
And I didn't hear from her for a week or two, I guess, and I thought, oh, God, that's horrible.
She's saying, she's saying, how can I tell her that maybe she should keep that nursing license up?
And she called me one day, and she said, this is excellent.
I'm sitting on the same bed where that doctor said there's something going on in your skin.
But anyway...
I said, oh, I can't really.
I started crying.
Oh, I'm so glad you like it.
Are you living here at the time?
No, I was living in Newton.
And I said, I don't care what else happens.
I'm just so glad you like it because it was sort of validation for me that I could write fiction and then could reach someone, you know.
And so she said, I said, okay, well, when I was at the ABA, which I was for family traditions, I met someone who was looking for novellas.
But anyway, she said, no, no, no, let me try something else.
It was a different publisher.
She said, let me just try something.
So she sent Durable Biz out on a Friday to two publishers, one of them obvious, a random house.
And on Monday, they both called back wanting books.
So I was beside myself.
I was beside myself.
But having two operas gives your agent a little bit of latitude.
Yeah, yeah.
I couldn't sleep.
I could eat.
I could always eat.
I can always eat.
But I would just wake up in the morning and think it's just too wonderful.
Did you have an auction between them?
There was a preemptive offer from Landon House.
Yeah, yeah.
Who has been your editor from.
She's a nice, lovely woman.
Oh, she is.
She is such a classy broad.
She is so great.
The critics breakfast at Random House in March.
She's the kind of editor who is so hands-off.
It's like a dream.
I mean, you know, she does not... The little guy is still running over there?
Yes.
So anyway... If you see the tapes stop, it means I have to flip it.
The red light will go out?
No, the red light won't stay on, but the thing will stop turning.
Oh, I didn't...
You want me to do a song?
I used to be a singer in a rock band.
I could do, I was, I could do Peace of My Heart.
Maybe later.
Anyway, so then Kate really loved Durable Goods, and let me tell you,
I've had such incredible luck in publishing.
I mean, people say all these terrible things, terrible editors.
I had such wonderful experiences in magazines, and Kate Medina didn't, you know, I didn't have to do anything.
You have a taste of this thing of rejection?
I mean, you have it.
Yes, I have American Girl magazine.
Anyway, she was...
absolutely behind durable goods i i think they did a fabulous job i think it's a beautiful looking dust jacket they were really behind it they were very excited about it um i felt great about about everything they did with durable goods so and i went on a little tour and everything and uh so then and then you know it's just been it's just been uh and that now we can kind of get into the books uh that was
Yeah, coming of age.
Yeah, I know, everybody rolls their eyes, oh, coming of age.
And you mentioned, and if you don't mind when I come scratching around as these ideas come, and if I'd just like to bring closure to the cancer thing, so... So would I. Can you do that?
So you basically got a clean bill now?
No.
No, it's not curable.
What I do is the parameter is the status of my skip.
So what I try to do is keep that rash off because it progresses.
You start with a rash and then there's internal involvement and then you don't even want to hear about it.
But what I found out is that
is that it is not inevitably progressive.
They can't get rid of it, but it doesn't mean that it will naturally progress through stage four in Kili, which is what the first guy said, and that people live 30 years with it.
So it's not like, you know, I mean, I was like FedExing all my mail, you know.
You know, a friend of mine, one of the best things that happened to me is a friend of mine called... Your attitude is unbelievable to be living with, you know, this kind of... No, well, because, you know, 10 years, I mean, do I look like I'm checking out to you?
One of my really good friends, this is the way that I handled it.
This is what helped me the most, aside from my deep kind of spirituality, which...
sort of don't want to talk about.
But anyway, she called me and said, you know, I wrote a letter to my friends, and I said, help me, because I'm really scared.
And here's the deal, and here's what I've been told, and just, you know, think of this.
These are friends.
Yeah, you know, good friends.
Women friends.
I sent a letter.
Not all women, no.
Anyway, so Wanda was her name.
Two of the books, certainly, you know.
Yeah.
Well, Wanda called me and said,
Well, you better not buy any green bananas.
Great.
There is a wonder.
Yeah, she's not a nurse.
She's nothing.
There are the similarity answers.
But she was called wonder.
She was called a lender.
You paid a bit of a bottle, a respectful bottle.
Anyway, so that's what I do.
There are times when the rash comes back and when that happens, I really get scared every time.
It's not as scary as the first time.
But there's nothing you can do to... I treat it.
I used topical chemotherapy for years, and then they told me, you really can't keep using this, because this is not like Kool-Aid.
And it can cause other kinds of cancer, you know.
So the last time he said, well, why don't you try...
Ultraviolet light.
There's a treatment called PUVA where you take a pill and you get the light.
Now I use the light at home in the basement.
My point is, I guess, and again, we're talking about a paragraph, so we don't really have to go in great length on it.
I mean, it's very personal stuff, and I don't feel comfortable asking if you don't go into it either.
But it does certainly, it's there when you're writing these books, isn't it?
Of course.
I mean, you know, Talk Before Sleep.
These two books have medical themes.
Well, Talk Before Sleep, all of that dialogue between Ruth and Anne around cancer is my dialogue with myself, essentially.
I did have a friend who died of breast cancer.
We did not have.
talks as soulful and searching as that.
And it was one of my regrets, in fact.
Also, my friend who died of cancer did not accept the fact that she was going to die.
She said, on the day when, she ironically enough let me
When I was diagnosed was one of the people who was really there for me.
You know, she had not been diagnosed herself.
Was she your friend?
Yeah, my friend who died of breast cancer.
We went out for a ride because I didn't want to tell her in front of my kids and I said, I've got cancer.
And she started crying and I started crying and she was, you know, she was going to support me.
Then she went on to get breast cancer.
Exactly.
And, you know, also after I was diagnosed, Kristen McAuliffe blew up.
And I thought, wait a minute, Kristen McAuliffe didn't have cancer.
You know what I mean?
She was around here, right?
I don't know where.
She's up in New Hampshire.
Her family's down here.
Her parents are... Anyway, so yes, you don't ever know.
And so, what were we thinking?
Well, I guess I'm interested in a couple of things.
We're getting there.
This is kind of the way I...
The closure for the campus, it's not gone.
I treat it different ways, so far successfully.
It certainly must give you an attitude of, you must have
I'd have to give a life in general as a result of this, or you're living with something on a daily basis.
Yeah, it never goes away.
I mean, it's just like this horrible tap, and it never goes away.
It's always behind you.
But you've got such a positive outlook as Lady does in this particular book.
Because you have a choice about how you're going to deal with that.
It is relevant, isn't it?
You can look at your skin all day long and say, oh god, this isn't fair, I'm too young at this, although I'm not too young anymore.
But why do that?
You're younger than I am.
I'm younger than I am as young.
I don't know about that.
But you also cannot work as an intensive care nurse and not have some awareness of the fragility of life.
You can't take care of an 18-year-old kid who was on a motorcycle yesterday drinking A&W and cruising and now on a ventilator with flat EDGs and not have some sense.
that it's a dangerous thing to be alive here.
Well, I have to ask, and we will weave this all together, because I fundamentally am interested in the work and the wellspring of creativity and all that.
And the roommate of college is clad entirely, a total pain in it, and you know what.
I mean, you want to kick her in the blind and say, what's wrong with you?
You're living, you're alive.
You know?
I think, and to some degree, this describes your own outlook, doesn't it?
And sharpened, perhaps, by your own experience that you've had.
Well, but I also write about people that I wish I wore like.
and and i have i do have a lot of optimism but i also have you know i also have days that i'm not so optimistic and if i were you know i'd like to be like laney i'd like to be that um continually delighted she is absolutely delighted in small ways all the time and and and i have that but i also feel like you know steamroller comes by every now and then and
It's a joy she takes out of things.
I mean, if the strawberries are nice, the honey is nice.
It fits in the Tupperware.
It fits.
That's right.
Exactly.
I also had, you know— I have a lot of myself in that.
I mean, this is great.
I know.
Isn't this wonderful?
Well, you know, why not?
Yeah, and I guess, you know, I'm pretty—
tired of the ever-so-correct cynical attitude and the models on the runway.
I mean, what is that?
There's hostile stuff going on.
It's reflected everywhere.
Everywhere.
Models on the runway, movies, attitudes of people at Burger King.
I'm a ranked sentimentalist, and I make no apologies for it.
That's...erange emotions.
And one of the reasons that that book is so important to me is that there it is, that if there was ever anything I ever wanted to do as a writer, it was to be able to say, look at this, and have someone say, I see it, you know, I see it now.
And, you know, I... Actually, is it just being... Yes, I mean, just that I wanted... I remember being a...
I don't know, I guess I was six or seven or something, and my mother was going to the bank, and I got out of the car with her, and there was a man sitting on the ground, and he didn't have legs, you know, they'd been cut off, and he was sitting on his blanket, and he had his cup, and he was asking for money, and I couldn't believe my eyes.
I had never seen him.
I had never seen anything bad happen to anybody, I guess.
And he was smiling and I got in the car and I burst into tears.
I couldn't believe it.
I felt so bad for him.
And my mother didn't know what to do.
I think I put this in one of my books.
But anyway, so she gave me some money.
She gave me a quarter or something and I put it in his cup and he said, thank you little lady.
And I said, but look how he is.
Look how he is.
that he doesn't have any legs but he's in the sunshine in his little half cut and he says thank you and he gets a quarter and I don't know and I wanted to be able to do something that would make someone else feel what I felt for that man and range of motion I think of anything I've ever written and there are two that I've written subsequent to that by the way so of the five
That's when I finished two more after Re-Internation, yeah.
Because really, that's another thing.
You're publishing one a year now, which is, you're on a roll here, aren't you?
But you know what?
It's my greatest joy.
It's so fun.
It is not work.
It is so much fun.
What's the title of the forthcoming book?
The next one?
After Range of Motion will be the sequel to Durable Goods.
You better read Durable Goods because the sequel's coming out.
I promise you.
Joy School.
I did have to go to bed last night.
Well, I don't know what you're doing.
Anyway, Durable Goods.
Yeah, the sequel to Durable Goods is called Joy School, which will be next, and the one after that, which I just finished.
Oh, really?
So we're going to bring our characters up soon.
I wasn't quite done with those characters.
I wasn't quite done with them.
You heard the voices.
I wrote Joy Sewell, and I really like it.
Now having read the two most recent books, I do see, even though they're decidedly different books, I find a nice and very interesting comparison between the two, which I will get to.
But I do see the voice is kind of your voice in a way, do you think?
Everything I write is.
They both narrated, but I see a single voice here.
Am I off on that?
No, I don't think you're off at all.
Mr. Rex T. Finnegan, who was my guidance counselor in high school, and I really loved him because he was a father figure to me, and he was the first one.
This was high school?
Yeah, in St.
Louis, Missouri.
I had a real hard time in high school.
I had a lot of problems with depression and I had stuff going on at home and all that.
He just had a kind of steady faith in me that was life saving in a way, perhaps literally.
I wrote to him when I went to college and he had never read anything I had written before.
And he wrote that saying, these letters are extraordinary.
It is just you talking.
I hear you talking in these letters.
And so that's, I think the way I've always written is, I don't know, I do this by the seat of my pants.
I don't know when I'm doing it.
I mean, I didn't study anything.
I haven't read Virginia Woolf.
I mean, it's really embarrassing.
But I have this,
desire, you know, this, you know, need, a compulsion to write.
And I did it when I, you know, when I was in high school, I wrote in my journal, in my black journal, I want to be dead, you know, all that stuff.
And you write, write, write.
And whenever I felt something strong, I had to write about it.
when I began writing for magazines.
Still, that happens.
Those essays are born of a deep feeling that I had, whether it was love for my children.
You watch your kids take a bath and you can't stand it.
You just can't stand it.
You have to write about why this is so wonderful.
What was the question, Nick?
Oh, voice, voice.
All my books are my voice.
My wife has heard a number of my interviews, and she's told me that my biggest problem is I can't shut up.
She's a social worker, you know.
And she said, you know, we're taught to let people talk and let them speak.
So every time I will listen to some of these interviews, and I'll say, damn it, they're saying something nice.
Why don't you let them keep going?
That's what I do, too.
And that's what I'm trying to do.
Well, I used to get so impatient with the direction that the thing was going in.
I said, oh, that's fine.
Let's get back on track.
Yeah, never mind.
No, no, no.
Anyway, you know, I do have a couple of things, and these are important so we don't forget, but give me for the record your husband's name and your children's name.
Okay, but before we do that, okay, so we got the answer to that question.
What was the question?
In terms of voice, in terms of voice.
Voice was the question.
And it's always me talking.
That's what Kate, yeah.
What a brilliant interviewer.
What Kate said in the letter that she sent out with a galley in Range of Motion, which I don't know if you saw, but she sent a really terrific letter out with a galley that said, when you read, oh, this is that part where I feel like you shut up about yourself.
When you read Elizabeth Berg, you feel like your best friend is talking to you, leveling with you about her life, you know, and that that seems to be characteristic of what I write, and I think that's true.
I mean, there's a voice in Durable Goods that is also my voice.
All right, now let's give me the name of your full name, your husband and your children.
Howard Jonathan Berg.
Okay.
And Julie is my older daughter.
Julie Morin.
I wanted to name her Morin, but no, I had to name her something that everybody would know.
How do you spell Morin?
She's M-A-R-I-N.
Like Morin County, California.
Yeah, isn't that a great name?
That's a great name.
She's old, but she's a student.
She will be 20 in October, and she's a student at Connecticut College.
Jenny Serene Berg, S-A-R-E-N-E, named after a hippie in Berkeley, California.
S-A-R-E-N-E.
She thought it was humiliating.
Now she loves it.
She wishes she was named Serene.
You see?
Anyway, she's going to be 15 on the 10th, on Monday.
The girls are the best, I have to say.
Oh, I know.
And she goes to Dana Hall School.
That's where?
It's in Wellesley.
My younger daughter goes to Faye, which is in South Wales.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Faye and then she'll go to St.
Mark's.
I was a school nurse at St.
Faye is so wonderful.
Yeah, watch out for St.
Mark's.
But she'll be living at home, right?
Yeah, we're 15 minutes away.
She might go to Worcester Academy where my older daughter is, would she like.
Yeah, St.
Mark's is pretty intense.
I was a school nurse for a year.
I mean, I know people at this inner city school,
I like the high scramble eggs.
But Faye is so great for our younger daughter.
They were so close in age, we really had to spend one one place and one another.
Yeah, that's a good idea.
Anyway, so you gave me the name of the kid.
So she's going to be a sophomore.
And you've been married for a number of years.
You've been married for a number of years.
I've been married for 150 years.
I got married in 74.
Okay, so it's pertinent.
Twenty-one years, my God.
Yeah, but the relationship that Lainey has with Ginny in this book is really quite remarkable.
I mean, it's… Yeah, there's a lot of… Howard really did that thing with the money.
We lived in… Come on, is that right?
Yeah.
It's pretty wonderful.
We lived in this real,
He was a cab driver.
He studied physics at the University of California, Berkeley, and so naturally became a cab driver.
And I was a nurse's aide, and we didn't have anybody.
Where did you meet?
Oh man, times was hard.
In Berkeley, I went out to Berkeley with my fiancé, sort of.
He wasn't, we were done with that fiancé stuff.
We were mostly just friends.
My fiancee moved into Howard's house because he was working.
This is in Berkeley?
Where else?
You went out there to do what?
Just to be there?
Okay.
I really wasn't in a rock band, and John, the guy who didn't work.
You really were.
Yeah, I really was.
It was the Blue Fox.
I was the girl singer.
So John, who was the organist for the band.
I heard that click.
No, it's still going.
Okay.
So John, who was the organist of the band, wanted to go back to Berkeley.
He'd been to Berkeley, and he always loved it, and he always wanted to go back, so he was going to go back to Berkeley.
So I said, fine, I'll go.
So he bought a van, a lots of typewriter company, a big yellow van, and we went to California.
He moved into Howard's house, and Howard was a hippie.
This is in the 70s, 60s?
This was in...
I was out there.
I was a naval officer on an aircraft carrier.
Whoa!
That was... Home-based in Alameda.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, well.
That's about three years out there.
That's the place, yeah.
So I hated California, actually.
I left it out and I didn't look back.
Physically, I drove across the Bay Bridge.
heading south to take the southern route.
It did not look, I've been back many times since.
I really like the people, I have to say.
We still have friends from there, but I just, I was so sick of calling directory assistants and having somebody so happy on the other end of the line.
It made me nuts, and every day was so beautiful, so beautiful.
You can go outside, and I couldn't stand it.
I really need the season, so we left.
I'm so happy to be here.
I'm just like, shut up!
Anyway, so, anyway, that's how I met him.
And he's now gainfully employed as a... Now he's a director of marketing at IBM.
Oh, really?
No kidding.
Yeah.
Here in Basler, in Boston.
No, okay.
Here's the Connecticut part.
He was at Lotus, and he got this job offer from IBM in White Plains, New York.
And we said, should we do this?
And we said, well, let's try.
If we don't like it, we'll come back.
So he still works in White Plains.
But he works from home.
The default schedule is that he works from home Monday and Friday.
And then he goes to White Plains Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday.
He can do it for three hours, I guess.
It's not bad.
His father lives in Hackensack, New Jersey, so he stays there when he goes to work.
They take me every once in a while through the record.
Yeah, that's not a bad paper, is it?
Not bad.
And they're starting a book supplement this fall, which I'm going to be very... You might have a book that you want to suggest to them?
No, I mean a book supplement for book features, not for book books.
Couldn't you write about your book under a cigarette?
Wouldn't it be great?
Why not?
You've got to write your call about your book.
I've got an instant audience of 30 papers, but how can you do it?
I can't do it.
I think you should think about it.
What I do is I give them a little shirt, what's called a shirt tail, a little tagline about who I am, and I always mention the book in there.
Well there you go.
And most of them run it, and that's better than that.
That's great.
Okay, so we've got the biographical stuff.
All right.
Your husband went to the University of California, Berkeley.
And where did you train to be a nurse?
I went to St.
Mary's Junior College in Minneapolis.
Minneapolis takes me.
You know, my Tim O'Brien piece out there was huge because it was Minneapolis.
So I'm really thinking of ways to get this story to Minneapolis.
Yeah, yeah, well that's where I went.
What happened was I went to the University of Minnesota and I was an English major.
And then I decided that I wanted to be a human, I wanted to teach English because I wanted to be in front of the classroom saying, when this author says this thing
Don't you feel this yuck, yuck, yuck.
And everybody would say, oh, Miss Huff is so wonderful.
I never understood, you know, so-and-so until... Meanwhile, you know, I hadn't read anything.
So then I abandoned that idea.
I wanted to be a humanities major.
Then I decided if I was going to be a humanities major, it had a thing to do with quit school, because you obviously wouldn't learn about humanities being in school.
So I quit school and became an information clerk at the Radisson Hotel.
And I had a whole bunch of jobs, and...
I was a waitress, and I cleaned chickens in a little cafeteria.
No!
On the West Coast... Okay, okay, okay, we're getting all next up.
On the West Coast, okay, I have been... Okay, my last job was... No, no, no, no, wait.
In fact, I'm going to turn the tape on the other side right now, all right?
And now we're going to...